Hello.

Hey guys.

Welcome to Concept and Coding.

And today I will tell you a very important design pattern which is builder design pattern.

I'll tell you about its, uh, problem.

What is this problem and how we resolve it.

I'll show you the real world solution like.

And we are using it day to day like you might have heard of Stringbuilder, right?

You are using it, right?

So Stringbuilder is based upon totally on the builder design pattern.

And the third and very most another, uh, so many people have confusion regarding it is like builder

versus decorator.

If you see my decorator design pattern video and check out the comment section, you will see many people

have asked that can it be solved through builder or not?

Right.

So I know that why this confusion happens and I'll try to clarify on today.

Right.

So now without wasting time, let's jump to it.

So first of all, you already know that builder design pattern is nothing but a creational design pattern.

And what is Creational design pattern?

Creational design pattern helps in creation of an object, so it is a Creational design pattern helps

in creation of an object, right?

I'll tell you its definition later, but first let me explain what are the problem it is solving.

So let's see the problem.

So consider any use case or any object where there are lot of optional fields.

So I have think of a student.

So let's say inside a particular student roll number is only mandatory.

This is only mandatory rest.

All are optional.

Rest all are optional.

This is optional.

This is optional.

This is everything is optional.

Only mandatory is roll number and currently I have taken only six seven uh, properties.

Let's say this in real.

This students have around 50 properties, right.

And all are optional except roll number.

So now how it's constructor will gonna be look like.

So let's say if this has so many optional parameters and its constructor, let's say first of all it's

if you have so many parameters, if you have so many properties itself, our constructor would be become

huge, right?

So we cannot have constructor like this.

So one thing is we have a very big constructor parameter list.

Because of so many optional fields right.

So this is one problem which we can think of.

What another problem can come because of this so many optional thing.

So this is another way is another problem.

Which have come is, let's say instead of one big constructor, I can have multiple small, small constructor.

I know that only roll number is mandatory.

So let's say I am creating one student.

I am only creating a student with roll number and age.

So I need only this constructor.

I don't need to add more parameter.

So now let's say another student I am creating, but I am student creating with roll number, age and

name.

So I created another constructor.

So let's say I have another use case roll number father name mother name.

Somebody is putting while creating a student roll number.

Father name mother name.

So they have added one more constructor.

So we see that because of this optionals, one more issue comes is that the number of constructor can

become huge, right?

And there is one more problem with this is like let's say if you are about to create one more constructor

Student roll number.

Integer.

Roll number.

And let's say a string.

Father name.

And instead of mother name, you want to use student name.

Name.

Can you use it?

String name.

Can you use it?

No.

It will throw compilation error because signature is same of both the constructor int string string.

Even though here it is mother name and here it is student name.

But still signature is same and compilation will fail.

So there are lot of issues can come in when you are using an then when there are lot of optional fields,

right.

So we need to find a way to handle those.

So that's where builder design pattern comes into the picture right.

So this was the problem I hope this problem is clear right guys.

What problem can happen because of this.

Optional fields.

And just these are 456 fields.

Just think about 100 fields, right?

It can cause a lot of problems.

So that's where builder design pattern comes into the picture.

So now let me tell you how it solved it.

Right.

So now let's come see the builder design pattern.

Okay I'll tell you within code itself also.

And I have pushed this code here.

This is my GitLab in the description and at the channel homepage also you can see.

So in go inside low level design design patterns and you will see builder design pattern.

Okay so first of all what is this definition.

So as you already know builder design pattern is nothing but a creational design pattern right.

And it also says that it is a step by step object creation process object creation.

So it creates an object step by step right.

So now question comes hey what do you.

What do you mean by step by step?

Object creation.

So, for example, take a house.

What?

So this is a very big object house.

House is a very big object.

So this house is composed of roof window, door right.

Walls let's say.

So what we can do is step by step.

So let's say before it will say that hey add roof.

So till now this house is constructed.

No.

Till now it is some in mediator form right.

Then it will say that hey add window.

Then it will say add a before window.

It will say that a add wall.

Add wall.

And then it would say that add door.

So you are saying step by step we have to perform something at door, right?

Then it will say that at window.

And once all done, then we will say that build.

Now it will make a house to us.

So you got it right.

Step by step.

So we first created, let's say wall.

And then second we have added a roof to it.

And then we have added door.

Then we have added window.

And then we are saying that hey now call the build method and then it will return a house actual house.

This is the object we wanted but at a particular each step.

Currently it is some mediator form.

Or you can say that in the builder form.

So in the builder form after adding a wall, it is still in a builder object form.

It is still in a builder form, builder form, builder form.

And when the ultimate build method is called it Return the house object.

Don't get confused.

Just understand this.

What I mean by step by step.

So I wanted to create a big object house.

But we have divided into different steps.

These steps are thing as a method.

So different methods.

So after each method it is in in some mediatory form right.

When all the methods are completed which is required to complete this house.

After that we call the build and we get a house.

Okay.

So before jumping into the builder design pattern, I want to show you the string builder.

What we have discussed as of now.

Methods.

Mediator form.

Mediator forms.

I will tell you with this one.

So here just see that.

Let's open the string builder.

Yeah.

So this is the string builder.

The string builder is nothing but a based upon builder design pattern.

So here if you see that in string builder.

So we have certain methods.

So here if you see that it has certain methods append method.

Right.

It is just consider those as an steps.

So delete character add delete right.

So after every step after every method does it giving us a final object.

No it is giving us returning us certain military object.

So what is that Mediatory object?

String builder itself so means builder itself.

So let's say if this is house and we have making a house builder some builder where we have put this

methods add wall, add door, add small small methods.

So what would be the return type in this case house builder itself.

You got it.

So see dot append what it is returning string builder itself.

And when all the methods are done and when we call build method.

Or it can be any name, let's say a final method or you got it right build method.

I just say that yeah.

Now build it so it will return me the actual object.

So here in the example of Stringbuilder, when we do two string, it will return me the actual object.

What was the actual object is new string okay.

So you got it.

What I mean by step by step okay.

So now let's jump into that.

How for our student example how this will work.

So let me use an example.

So we have an student object.

So you know that what was the challenge with the object.

Because we have a lot of optionals.

So here I have certain mandatory field and lot of options.

So now in the constructor you will see the first difference in the builder design pattern.

The first difference is I am not creating a constructor with all the parameters, or I am not creating

multiple small small constructor.

Right?

What I did is I passed the builder object, right?

So means here in the student constructor what object I have student builder object.

Right.

And all its mandatory and optional fields are getting filled from this.

This dot roll number equals to builder object dot roll number like this.

Right.

So one advantage we got is like we don't have to put lot of parameters inside the constructor.

And also we don't need a small, small constructor, right?

Whatever the values builder had, it were filled up.

Okay, now one thing, another get cleared with this is like builder will have all this parameters also.

That's why that's how we are able to fill the respective fields right in that so means in the student

builder.

Let's say whatever whatever the object, whether it's a house, then you have a house builder, you

have a car, you have a car builder, you have a pizza, you have a pizza builder.

So here in our example student, we have to create a student builder.

Right.

So I told you that since we student builder is the one which is getting passed to the student constructor

means student builder has all the fields, all the parameters.

So let's check the student builder.

Yeah.

So here if you see that the student builder has all the parameters.

So this is one more disadvantage.

So this is the disadvantage of builder design pattern.

There is a certain code duplicacy and the line of the code gets increased.

So student also has the parameters here.

And student builder also has this all parameters because we have to pass it to the student constructor

okay.

That is one disadvantage.

So now here.

So this can be an either interface or either abstract either interface or either an abstract.

And we can have a concrete builder we can define.

So let's say a student right.

So I have constructed two let's say engineer engineer.

Student builder and MBA A student builder so we can have multiple builders, right?

Student builder.

It's an interface or abstract.

We can have different type of builders.

Okay.

So now see this what I told you in the builder that we have steps.

A small step.

What this steps is nothing but a method right.

So in our house example add wall.

Add roof, add door.

These are the methods right.

But in our student what are all the methods set roll number.

So what are the fields which we have.

Set roll number.

Setters set roll number set.

Age.

Set.

Name.

Set.

Father.

Name.

Set.

Mother name.

Set.

Subject.

So all this setter methods.

Right.

And just to differentiate between an engineer student builder and MBA student builder, the one set

subject method, I have just differentiated it just to show you that we can have multiple builder also.

right.

So in the engineer student builder the subject is DSA, OS Computer architecture.

And in the MBA student builder we can have economics, business study, operation management.

Okay.

So they have certain methods.

They have certain methods.

Certain methods set rule number.

Set subject set age.

Similarly it is also had certain set rule number set its own subjects set age.

Right.

And what I told you right here in each method.

Currently it is in mediatory form.

And it would be what would be the return type builder itself.

So here if you see that for all the return setters, what is the return type builder itself.

Right.

We set it and return the builder itself when we return the final object during build method.

So we will have build method.

So we will have build method and build method will return the final object.

What is the final object.

Student.

So here if you see that I created a build object build method.

Build method is returning the final object a student.

So new student and pass the builder.

And from this builder this parameters the final students get filled up.

Okay.

Second layer got properly clear this builders right.

So this is where this is the most important part.

Like so we are creating a builder.

So which has similar properties.

And it has this methods.

And these methods return types are builder itself.

Right.

And we have a build method which ultimately returns the student in this case.

And there become a third layer, which is nothing but a director, which is called as director.

So director is nothing but which calls this methods in a particular manner.

So I told you that we have like first we have to call, let's say add wall, then we have to put roof.

Then we have to put door.

Who will who will direct it.

Director will direct it.

Right.

So we are not we are just a student.

Right.

So for us it's a setter method.

So we can call in any manner.

So but director can take a responsibility.

Right.

Okay.

In which order.

I can have to call the method.

And after that when that particular, uh, object is done I can call a build method.

Right.

So director method is the one which has the builder object and then it calls the method.

So let me show you the director method here.

So director method has a builder Whether it can have, let's say, engineering student builder or MBA

student builder.

Right.

So based upon a builder, it will construct a student.

How in step by step.

So here it is calling a method.

First let's say this it is storing the engineer student builder.

So this method will get invoked.

So now it is calling hey call set roll number.

Now set roll number is builder itself.

Then for this builder set age set name set subject.

And ultimately we'll call the build.

And then it will return the student.

So you got it right in this our student use case.

There is no sequence right.

But you got it right.

What is the director uh usage.

It can provide you help you in the some business logic and sequencing also.

Hey call this step one.

This is step two.

This is step three.

Now my complete object is done.

Now call the build object.

So similarly for MBA, put a roll number.

Put an age put name.

Hey I also need another name and another name for MBA.

So I have added that.

But for engineering student I don't need I didn't added that and last it calls the build.

So till this point everything is mediator.

It's a builder only and last it will call the student.

Okay, you got it.

The use of director director is the one which guides like, which invokes the method and calls the build

method and ultimately returns the object to the whom to the client.

So now client will call director right and pass what student he wanted.

So now if you see the client method clients calls to director it created director one, director two.

And for the director one it passed engineering student.

And for the second director I passed MBA student.

All it has to do is create student, right?

What it called create student.

That's all.

Nothing much.

Now, if you see that client looks very easy.

Hey, just create me a student.

Director will do that, okay?

You have engineering student.

Okay, I'll call its method.

Whatever it's required to create an object of this engineering student.

I will call this method and then call, build and return you an object.

It will say hey okay it is MBA student.

I will call this method.

And whatever methods are required to build an MBA object, maybe step one.

Step two.

Step five.

Not all.

I will create an object I'll call build and then return it.

You got it right.

Easy.

So this is your builder design pattern.

And with this one I'll tell you why it is getting so much confused with decorator.

It's the whole culprit is bizarre example.

I'll tell you why.

So first of all, builder design pattern is your Creational design pattern.

Creational design pattern means it is responsible for creation of an object.

And decorator design pattern is your structural design pattern.

Structural design pattern is like helps you in creating a complex objects right structure like upon

building a structure, right?

So it helps you in creating a complex object with a small small objects.

And it helps in creating an object, not constructing.

Right.

Not constructing the structure.

Now the culprit is bizarre example.

Let's understand with the pizza example how they differ.

So now let's say we have a base pizza.

We have a base pizza, so this base pizza can be decorated with cheese.

I will take a small example.

I will don't make it too big.

Mushroom.

Only two things.

So this base pizza can be decorated with cheese.

And then this again.

This again itself is a pizza only.

And then this again can be decorated with mushroom.

And this again is pizza only.

And ultimately you get a pizza.

Okay.

Understandable.

But how we can solve it.

Builder design pattern right.

Can builder design pattern be used to create a pizza?

Let's see.

So here let's say my the where we take a student.

So now here I have a pizza.

And pizza has lot of optionals right.

So let's say it is base.

So it is base is let's say crust could be thin crust thick crust whatever.

Let's say this is mandatory.

What are its options?

Let's say cheese.

Cheese is optional.

Possible, right.

Mushroom.

Mushroom is optional.

And there could be many.

But I told I will take simple.

So let's say this is my base pizza.

Like kind of a normal pizza class.

Then what is the second layer?

Pizza builder.

Right.

So this might be an abstract or interface which will have all these things now.

Pizza builder can be many like let's say I have, uh, pizza plus cheese.

Base.

Base.

Pizza plus mushroom.

Builder.

Builder or I have base Pizza Plus or let's say for now, this two base Pizza plus cheese builder base

pizza plus mushroom builder, right.

These two builders I have, and let's say I have a director.

So director will say that.

Hey.

Okay, you need to create, uh, base pizza.

Normal pizza with cheese.

Okay.

So what it will do is it will call its steps.

Let's say add add crust.

It will have one method add crust.

Right.

This will also have method add crust.

So let's say it is adding thin crust.

Then it will have method add cheese.

So it will call.

So director will call that okay.

You want this pizza I it will take out this object and then it will call its method add crust.

Then it will add add cheese and then it will call build and return the pizza.

Now the second time you want the hey I want pizza with mushroom.

So it will take out okay.

This is the constructor.

This is the builder.

So it will call its method add crust, add mushroom and then build add crust add mushroom then build

and it will return an object.

Now where the decorator and builder got differ.

Now let's say you got another request.

Hey I want this pizza plus cheese plus mushroom.

Will you able to do it?

No.

Because builder design pattern cannot handle dynamic request.

You have to create one class based pizza with plus cheese plus mushroom.

This is all its steps built.

So it it.

Okay.

Okay.

You want this builder.

Then it will call its steps and then build.

But with the decorator this can support dynamic.

Using this it can support dynamic.

So I hope you got the difference builder.

With builder design pattern you cannot support dynamic nature of an object.

But with decorator even the dynamic representation of an object.

Any use case we can support.

Okay guys, I hope you got it.

The builder design pattern or or your code already have description, so go ahead and if there is any

doubt let me know.

I can also take one live session on it to clear more doubts, but I hope this would get cleared.

Your doubts with the builder design pattern.

Okay, guys.

Bye.

Good night.